---
layout: post
title:  "Using RDPTools to assign taxonomy to 16s sequences"
date:   2018-09-25 02:08:46 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

**Using RDPTools to assign taxonomy**


RDPTools comes across as a pretty useful way to assign taxonomy if you are having some trouble with the greengenes database.

I was having some trouble working with the database because I was unable to find mappings that were unique for the 16s sequences I had.

It looked like there might be multiple different 100 percent matches to the greengenes database. 

After confirming that sometimes these matches were for different bacteria.
I was starting to doubt whether I was using the database effectively or even correctly so I decided to check with another database tool.
Hopefully this would tell me whether there was a problem with my sequences or I needed to change the way that I was using greengenes.
I considered that possibly I should make a database of my 16s and see what greengenes sequences matched.

RDP has most of their information available on their github at: This location[https://github.com/rdpstaff/classifier]

Once you have finished installing and combined the 16s rRna that you need to look at into one large fasta file all that you need to run is

java -Xmx1g -jar /path/to/classifier.jar 

to get the help options

to classify your samples and output a csv file you run

java -Xmx1g -jar /path/to/classifier/jar -o /path/to/output.txt /path/to/fastaInputFile.fasta

This will take in your fastaInputFile.fasta and spit out an output.txt file in the location yous pecify.

